[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Milk-- something all
of us grew up with--
something most of
us were encouraged
to drink to grow big and strong.
For decades, the image that
has been cultivated around milk
is a healthy one.
Not just the milk industry, but
nutrition research institutes
across the world encourage
the daily consumption
of milk and dairy products.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> For a scientist, the
diversity of the substances
present in milk is phenomenal.
>> But is milk really healthy?
The positive image is faltering.
For years, there has been a
fierce debate between those who
are pro milk and its critics.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Milk as we know it today
has very little to do with
the original foodstuff.
>> Critics claim that milk can
cause civilization diseases,
such as allergies,
diabetes, or migraines--
even cancer.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Milk is a biological
doping system.
We are talking about a process
that repeatedly pushes us
into growth phases.
In my view,
civilization diseases
are illnesses caused
by excessive growth.
>> Those for and against milk
accuse each other of setting
an aggressive tone.
As a result, milk is one of
the most disputed products
in the food industry.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We are studying.
We are observing.
I'm not in a war.
It is the anti-milk faction
that's on the warpath.
>> Consumers are
increasingly uncertain.
Whom should one believe?
We are on the
search for answers.
Is milk healthy, or
is milk bad for you?
We are on a quest for the truth,
and visit scientists, doctors,
and milk producers
across Europe.
Our journey begins in
the northwest of France.
We want to see how milk
is processed nowadays
and what consequences this
can hold for its consumers.
We visit a dairy plant
belonging to the French milk
cooperative, Laita.
The farmers deliver 40
tankers of milk to the plant.
That is one million
liters every day.
The dairy uses it to
make cheese, butter,
and milk powder.
President of the Laita
cooperative is Dominique
Chargé.
As a representative
of the milk industry,
he considers the debate
around milk overhyped.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Milk consumption is
encouraged by nutritional
experts.
It's a basic foodstuff,
and the first thing
we consume after we're born.
It's recommended by
the National Program
for Health and Nutrition.
But as with all foods, it
also attracts controversy.
Thanks to the high health
and safety standards
in today's dairy industry,
there's never been less risk.
But there are still people
who say milk is not good.
I think back to the
example of butter.
10 years ago, it was
criticized for having
too much cholesterol.
But today, it's
recognized as a good food.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In a modern dairy, the milk
goes through several processing
stages on arrival.
The most important
are homogenization and
pasteurization.
Homogenizing is when the
fat particles of milk
are broken up to prevent
it from getting creamy.
During pasteurization,
the milk is heated
for 30 seconds to
72 to 75 degrees
Celsius to kill bacteria and
increase the milk's shelf life.
At Laita, the pasteurized milk
is used amongst other things
to make cheese.
Despite the industrial
scale of production,
there is emphasis
that milk is still
a natural product, traditionally
produced, healthy, and safe.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We make dairy products
like cheese, butter,
and yogurt the same way we
did 40 to 50 years ago--
naturally, with new
methods and techniques
that are recognized
and monitored,
and are under
strict regulations.
I think, due to the
safety of these controls,
milk is an excellent
product that you
can consume without a problem.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> So there's nothing
wrong with milk?
Some experts would
strongly disagree.
We go to the Alps, to
Innsbruck, in Austria.
We want to find out
whether the processing
that milk undergoes can have
an effect on our health.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have an appointment
with a specialist
for food intolerances, and meet
Dr. Maximilian Ledochowski.
In his surgery.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Milk, as we know it today,
has very little in common with
the original foodstuff.
It goes through 20 to
30 processing stages,
from heating to storage,
cooling, homogenization,
pasteurization, separation of
the milk bubbles, milk fats,
and so on.
In the end, the name
is the only similarity
with the original product.
>> Amongst Dr. Ledochowski's
patients' records,
there are many cases
of food intolerances.
Their roots line the processing
methods used by the modern food
industry.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I always say, a
little ill-naturedly,
that the diseases which I
treat are caused by nutrition
scientists, or by the research
done by theoretical nutrition
medics.
>> This is especially true
of modern dairy products.
According to Dr.
Ledochowski, the cause
of many peoples' symptoms is
a reaction to the processing.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Our stomach is used to
digesting milk and dairy
products in their original form.
We haven't had the time to
adapt to the new developments
implemented by
the food industry.
That takes many generations.
>> Has milk become problematic
for our digestive system due
to its processing as a
modern industrial product?
What do the official
nutrition institutes say?
We travel to the north of
France to the Pasteur Institute
in Lille, the world's
leading center
for fundamental research.
It advises the French
government and the World Health
Organization.
Professor Jean-Michel
Lecerf is head
of the Nutrition Department.
He is amused by the notion
that modern processing can
have a negative effect on milk.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> It's a funny idea.
All food is processed.
These procedures can have a
negative or a positive effect.
All studies on the
health effects of milk
were carried out with
processed milk, UHT milk,
homogenized milk,
and pasteurized milk.
The studies found no negative
effects, but positive ones,
for whatever reason.
Perhaps there are changes
that need to be examined,
analyzed-- perhaps corrected.
But overall, there are no
noticeable negative effects.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Professor Lecerf considers
milk to be fundamentally
healthy, which is why he
supports the official French
recommendation of consuming
three milk products a day.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> There are two reasons
why milk is so special.
Firstly, it has a
unique composition,
and is one of the most
nutritious food stuffs
there is.
The other reason, which I
think is even more important,
is what milk represents.
It's the first thing
that nourishes the young,
and that symbolism gives
it a certain strength.
>> [GROWLS]
>> [YELLING]
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
Stop!
Hey, wolf.
Do you know the tale of
"beat the big bad wolf?"
>> [GROWLS]
>> It's the story of three
little pigs that ate--
>> --three dairy products--
>> --every day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And all of a sudden-- hi-yah!
[SMACK]
>> [GROANS]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[LAUGHTER]
>> [SINGING IN FRENCH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Also in Germany, the National
Association for Nutrition
recommends that daily
consumption of dairy products--
ideally, 250 milliliters of skim
milk and two slices of low-fat
cheese.
Germany and France are the
leading dairy producers
in Europe.
The milk industry is an
important economic factor
for both countries.
France produces 25 million
tons of cow's milk a year.
Germany, almost 32 million tons.
Such a large output is only
possible through efficient
dairy cow breeding, and
through using high-yield cows
and concentrated feed--
power feed.
We want to know what
conventional milk production
looks like today,
and visit a dairy cow
farm in Northeast Germany.
Dairy farmer, Philipp
Kowolik, is in charge.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> On our farm, there are about
1,000 dairy cows that give milk
daily.
They're milked
three times a day,
stand in four different
barns, and are
in six different groups.
[COWS MOOING]
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> One dairy cow produces around
28,000 liters in its lifetime--
around 9,500 liters
a year, on average.
Conventionally speaking, we
are a little above average.
Of course, by maximizing
the animals' welfare,
we aim to increase the
cows' productivity.
A cow that gives a lot of
milk has to be kept healthy.
It has to feel comfortable.
Otherwise, it won't
produce much milk.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> They're not agitated.
That's how you can see you're
doing everything right.
They're not nervous.
They're not kicking,
but standing calmly.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The quality of the milk and
its makeup is determined by how
the cows are kept--
their health and
what they are fed.
On this dairy farm, the cows get
hay and an energy-rich feed--
a power feed that is made up of
corn, grain, and coarse colza
meal.
Without it, they would
not produce as much milk.
But aren't cows
natural grass eaters?
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> My opinion is that today's
cow needs energy-rich feed.
If we put the feed and
the hay side by side,
the cow would eat
the feed first,
as it has a certain
thirst for energy.
And we have to address that.
We can't compare this
dairy cow with cattle
from 2,000 years ago.
In my opinion, a
high-performance cow
that makes a lot of
milk is much healthier,
because it has to be
well-managed to put out
a lot of milk.
A cow doesn't produce
the milk just like that.
It doesn't just fall into the
milk tank or the milk bottle.
It takes a lot to
manage a high-yield cow.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Philipp Kowolik does not
think this highly-efficient way
of keeping cows has
negative effects on milk.
Just the opposite.
According to him, overall,
the milk quality has improved.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> The substances in milk
have stayed the same.
There's been no change in
the last 20 to 30 years.
The quality of the
milk has improved,
if we are talking about the
cold chain, which is always
kept at four degrees, and that
the milk is rapidly cooled.
Then the milk is
packed with transports
and is brought to the dairy.
This supply chain has
become very efficient,
and is constantly controlled.
Every cow is examined for its
milk quality once a month.
There are so many control
mechanisms in place
that I can certainly vouch
the quality of milk is better.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Is that true?
Has milk quality improved?
We go to Switzerland, to the
Paracelsus Clinic in Lustmühle.
It is a clinic for
holistic medicine,
with complementary
treatments like homeopathy.
It functions as a clinic
of academic medicine.
Dr. Thomas Rau is head
doctor of the clinic.
He has been critical
of dairy products
for years, mainly due to the
beta-lacto protein contained
in milk that can
lead to allergies.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The cow has changed.
The cow is fed differently.
What the cow eats is
important, as the feed
influences milk production.
The milk has fundamentally
changed, at the latest
since 1983 is shown in studies.
But it changed even
earlier than that.
It has much higher levels
of beta-lacto protein.
It is now more protein-rich.
It also has lost its
omega 3 fatty acids,
and has far less trace elements.
And so nutritious
milk has been changed
into an industrial
foodstuff, and it's just
not the same anymore.
[BELLS RINGING]
>> If milk, then organic
milk, advises Dr. Rau.
But what is the difference
between organic milk
and conventional milk?
[BELLS RINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We visit the Swiss farm, Gut
Rheinau, by the River Rhine--
a farm run according to
strict organic guidelines.
There are only 70 cows here.
They still have their
horns and their own names.
[COW MOOING]
We meet the organic farmer
and former farm manager
of Gut Rheinau, Martin Ott.
Ott has set himself the
goal of taking the turbo out
of milk production.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> You see, 200 years ago, the
world champion milk producing
cow was making around
2,000 kilos of milk a year.
Today, it's 27,000.
That kind of breeding
compromises health.
On the other hand, we
have a milk surplus.
The milk that isn't
needed lowers the prices.
The pressure increases, and we
end up in this familiar spiral.
And I made the
wonderful discovery--
you just have to
understand the cow.
Understand the cow in
its field, and give it
the direction it needs, the
task that it actually wants,
and the role that it
has always played.
And that is eating grass.
[COWS MOOING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Gut Rheinau Farm only has
as many cows as the land can
nourish--
a sustainable cycle,
including agriculture,
with no external input.
This makes the
milk more expensive
than conventional milk.
It is a counter-model to
conventional cattle farming
that buys its feed,
including corn and palm oil,
from the global market.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> If you don't change the
system and say we have to carry
on producing the amounts
of milk that we have today,
then there's no
hope for organic.
Organic is always a
system, and the milk
that is produced from grass will
always be in limited supply,
due to cows.
If we let this cycle
take over again,
then we will have less
milk, and the milk
will have a better price.
It may be more expensive
than Coca-Cola,
and then everything
will be back in order.
And then milk will have its
correct role in nutrition
again, and not just
be a mass product
that one can
consume industrially
in all forms from anywhere.
That's my vision.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Organic milk as a sustainable
alternative to the globally
mass-produced milk?
But is organic milk
really healthier?
We go to the Max
Rubner-Institut in Karlsruhe--
the National German
Research Institute
for Food and Nutrition.
We have an appointment with
Professor Bernhard Watzi,
head of the Department of
Physiology and Biochemistry
and Nutrition.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> The way we feed the cow
affects the makeup of the milk.
And that means, due to organic
production regulations,
we can influence the makeup
of the fatty acids, which
results in better
composition and higher
levels of nutrient-rich
substances in organic milk.
For example, the
omega-3 fatty acid,
where we find levels
that are 50% higher--
in the long term, it's
certainly an advantage.
But even so, it's a
moderate advantage.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Milk is healthy, according
to the Max Rubner-Institut.
And organic milk is a
little bit healthier.
Yet, there are many people whose
system cannot tolerate milk.
The most common reason
is lactose intolerance.
In central Europe, this
affects one in seven people.
Awareness of lactose
intolerance has risen sharply
in recent years.
More and more people believe
they are suffering from it.
But what is lactose intolerance?
We asked the expert
for food intolerances
in Innsbruck, Dr.
Maximilian Ledochowski.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Lactose intolerance
is actually normal,
according to the
global population,
as 75% of people lose the
ability to break down milk
sugar, lactose, after
they are breastfed.
If the milk sugar
is not broken up,
it is fermented by
bacteria in the gut.
And these fermented
products create
problems, such as stomachache,
diarrhea, bloating, and so on.
>> According to Dr. Ledochowski,
lactose intolerance is
on the rise.
But he thinks there
is another problem.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> One factor contributing to
the rise in lactose intolerance
is the increase in
milk consumption.
But it is also the amount in the
way in which milk is produced.
There are so many steps
in the processing system
that can lead to intolerances.
But this, in turn,
leads to the increase
in intolerance reactions.
And this is typically attributed
to lactose intolerance.
But often, it is a
combination of intolerances,
not just the milk sugar itself.
Previously, we didn't
put any thickeners
into our dairy products.
Nowadays, you can
hardly buy yogurt
that doesn't contain alginate
or carob gum and these things,
only so it becomes creamier
and has more flavor.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> People that have problems
due to dairy products do not
necessarily have an
intolerance to milk.
There is a further possibility--
the allergic reaction.
In the Paracelsus Clinic
for Holistic Medicine,
Dr. Rau recommends his patients
to cut out dairy products.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> How are the infections?
>> I got one recently, but it
cleared up much more quickly.
The sore throat was
gone within two days.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What have you
changed in your diet?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I have cut out
gluten and milk.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Good.
And how is that going?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Yes.
It tastes better.
You get used to it.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> [LAUGHS] [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> All cow milk protein
products-- yogurt, cheese,
all of the creams, and so on--
have milk in them.
And we consider
these as problematic,
and very allogeneic products.
Because beta-lacto
protein, the milk protein,
causes the most allergic
reactions out of all foods--
much more than lactose, than
gluten and nuts and all that.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
It looks like the
products you're
allergic to are milk and gluten.
That's doubly annoying.
That has destroyed
your gut flora
and your intestinal
mucosa, and this affects
your whole immune system.
These people have
slightly higher levels
of histamine in their
bodies, and react stronger
to secondary allergies.
We have the symptoms of those
allergic to cow's milk--
the much more rare
allergy to gluten.
So the celiac also has
secondary allergies,
is allergic to hay pollen, or
strawberries, or cat hair--
secondary allergies.
>> An estimated 1% of adults
in central Europe are allergic
to cow's milk.
In the Paracelsus Clinic, this
percentage is much higher.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Among my standard
checkup patients,
those who are just
health conscious,
we see about 60% with an allergy
to the IgG4 lacto protein.
With our autoimmune
patients, it is over 80%.
Amongst our cancer
patients, it's almost 95%.
This is an incidental
rise of these illnesses.
And when I see it in
hundreds of patients, for me,
that has the
authority of a study.
I just see it so much.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> According to
Dr. Rau's findings,
dairy products can lead to a
chronic weakening of the immune
system.
The consequence--
increased infections,
such as chronic angina
or chronic sinusitis.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> One liter of milk is
made from thousands of cows.
These thousands of cows are
treated with antibiotics.
Their proteins are
altered by pasteurization.
And you get an
immunological mash-up.
In our region, there
are 30,000 cows
whose milk is mixed together.
That means 30,000 different
immunological profiles
that are picked up.
It's an avalanche of
immunological information
that rains down on
our young children.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[LOW ROAR]
[HOOF BEATS]
[WOMEN VOCALIZING]
>> Milk-- a force of nature.
>> For decades, it has been said
that especially children should
drink a lot of milk.
We all grew up with the
notion, milk is healthy.
Milk makes you big and strong.
Milk strengthens bones.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In my childhood, milk
was a fundamental part
of our nutrition.
One didn't have an explanation.
It was a tradition.
>> Research institutes
for nutrition,
like the Pasteur Institute
in Lille, confirm.
Milk is particularly
recommended for children.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Milk is highly nutritious.
It contains many
high-quality proteins that
are very important for growth.
>>
[SINGING IN NON ENGLISH  SPEECH]
>> Milk critics, like the
specialist for nutrition, Dr.
Ledochowski, do not consider
milk as being good for children
and young people, and
recommends against it.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> A few years ago, I was at a
diabetes congress in Leipzig.
And the German National
Foods Study was presented.
And it showed that animal
proteins, those recommended
in the preschool years,
had a correlation
to adolescent obesity.
And I asked, what
animal protein?
And there was a long
pause, until it came out
that it was milk protein.
So I should say that nowadays,
it makes no sense for milk
to be a fundamental part
of the diet for anyone
over five years of age.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What consequences could milk
consumption have for children?
Widely diverse ones.
Children get allergic
illnesses, asthma,
and even long-term, due
to the ongoing irritation
of the immune system,
autoimmune diseases.
Autoimmune illnesses
are increasing the most
amongst children--
juvenile arthritis, diabetes,
and various other illnesses
which are autoimmune.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Is milk really partly
responsible for this?
The Max Rubner-Institut
sees no connection--
quite the opposite.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Scientific data shows
that milk consumption has no
negative consequences in
early and later childhood,
with regards to weight
trends or diabetes.
Indeed, it is the case that
moderate milk consumption
plays a protective role.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Milk as a valuable
natural product.
It is good for you and
makes you beautiful.
That's what the adverts sell.
And this is not far from the
official school of thought,
which states, due to its
high calcium content,
milk is good for bone
development in children,
and protects against
osteoporosis in adults.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> All the clinical trials in
which subjects were given milk
or calcium products over a
long time frame show that bone
density increases.
Bones strengthened, and
their calcium concentration
increased.
But not on their own.
Osteoporosis is a complex
disease, with various factors.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> That milk and dairy products
are rich in calcium is certain.
If we go from the
assumption that one
needs 1,200 milligrams
of calcium a day
to keep bones healthy,
it means that we should
consumer a liter of milk a day.
That would mean that
mammals which no longer have
a source of calcium
after they were breastfed
would develop osteoporosis.
Which means that all people
who are lactose intolerant
should develop osteoporosis.
The opposite is true.
In countries where lactose
intolerance is endemic,
osteoporosis is much more
rare than in countries
where people tolerate lactose.
So Germany, Scandinavia-- where
milk consumption is highest.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Milk consumption is
especially high in Sweden,
where a study was published
two years ago that caused
an international sensation.
It claimed that people
who drink a lot of milk
do not have a
lower, but a higher
chance of breaking their bones,
and they even die earlier.
We travel to Sweden to
the University of Uppsala,
and meet the man in
charge of the study--
the nutrition expert,
Professor Karl Michaelsson.
He evaluated the data
of 100,000 Swedish men
and women aged over 40.
>> Among women, we found
a higher risk of fracture.
Especially hip fracture--
the most devastating type
of fragility
fractures in elderly.
And also a higher
rate of mortality--
of death among high
consumers of milk.
We saw the same
tendency among men,
but it was much
weaker among men.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Professor Michaelsson
attributes this to the damaging
effect of galactose, a
component of milk sugar.
Animals that were
given galactose
demonstrated an
accelerated aging process.
>> The amount of galactose given
to these animals corresponds
to the galactose content of
one to two glasses of milk,
so it fits nicely with
our study results.
>> So are dairy products
generally harmful?
For Professor Michaelsson,
it's not quite that simple.
His study clearly distinguishes
between milk and fermented milk
products, like yogurt or cheese.
They contain less galactose.
And here, the study
yields different results.
>> We also found that high
consumption of cheese,
soured milk, and yogurt was
associated with a somewhat
reduced risk of
fracture and death,
in contrast to the
findings of milk.
>> Professor Michaelsson does
not want to dictate nutrition
guidelines for the
general population.
First, more studies
need to be done.
But the claim that a lot of
milk strengthens bone, for him,
has been disputed.
>> Our study showed that it
increases the risk of fragility
fractures in elderly.
But many other studies
show that it doesn't
reduce the risk of fracture.
And this has been
the health claim
for many decades from
milk-producing companies,
that you get strong bones if you
consume high amounts of milk.
But the evidence for
that claim is very weak.
>> Would it be better for other
countries with a high milk
consumption to consume less
so bones stay healthier?
No, say the
nutrition institutes.
They stand by their
positive verdict on milk.
The relatively high milk
consumption in Sweden cannot be
transposed onto other
countries' conditions.
And the study also shows
too little milk is not good,
either.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> When you look at the study,
the women there consume 600
milliliters of milk a day.
In France, it's 100 milliliters.
Those are two completely
different things.
You have to ask why the
excess of milk products--
and it is an excess--
is not beneficial.
Excess is never a good thing.
It's not something I recommend.
Another exaggeration which this
study shows is that people who
consume no milk--
for example, children
that have an intolerance--
break their bones two
to three times as often.
That is proven here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The study from Sweden
demonstrates that for complex
foods like milk, drawing final
conclusions is difficult.
This raises the question,
how far can the results
of individual studies
be generalized?
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> That's the core question
when you engage with the issue
of the health benefits
of different foods.
What data do we have?
Not every study is
of the same quality.
And now we have clear
criteria, generated
by the scientific
community, that
can be used to assess studies.
How significant are the studies?
Are they purely observational
or interventional?
They are all different types of
studies that, taken together,
could be considered as
evidence and allow us
scientists to say
we have convincing
data, probable data--
possible data.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Only the sum of the studies--
the so-called metastudy,
has real significance
in the professional field.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Which is why I always warn
journalists from relying on one
study.
One can always find a study
that proves their argument
or interpretation, but this
is not scientifically correct.
We need to take all
things into consideration,
and only that will allow
us to objectively assess
the data situation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Doctors that go against
this school of thought
and discourage milk consumption
generally don't rely
on nutrition studies.
They rely on the therapy
experience with their patients,
even if this does not have
the scientific recognition
of studies.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> If you ask me whether
one really needs scientific
studies.
I quote the migraine example.
There is no study that
scientifically or statistically
proves that any food has
anything to do with migraines.
Despite this, my own
experience and the experience
of other individuals shows
that when I eat chocolate,
I get a migraine.
If I eat this or that,
my migraine goes away.
But, on the whole, I cannot
statistically prove this.
So is that knowledge less
correct than anything else,
even though I know it
and can reproduce it?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Milk critics see another
problem with the studies.
Sometimes, the research was
not performed independently,
or there is a link between
the scientific institute
and the industry.
We travel to the south of
France, close to Nimes.
This is where Thierry
Souccar, a science
journalist and
publisher of books
that are critical of milk.
It is his goal to
reveal the connections
between food science and
the French food industry.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> The French recommendation
to consume three milk products
a day is based on nothing.
There is no serious
scientific basis for it.
It just demonstrates
the closeness
between the French
state, the people
who make the decisions
on nutrition,
and the milk industry.
I've uncovered this
connection in my book,
and also the names of the
Frenchmen that are responsible.
And I have never
been sued by anyone.
No one has called for me
to retract my statements.
>> Souccar is critical of the
Pasteur Institute in Lille.
According to him, it is not
financially independent.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
The Pasteur
Institute in Lille is
in a tenuous
financial situation.
It's dependent on
money from industry.
In particular,
the milk industry.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It is true.
The Pasteur Institute is a
private, non-profit foundation
that is largely financed by
private research and consulting
commissions.
French dairy corporations,
like Danone and Lactalis,
make up their clientele.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We receive a small amount
of government funding.
We are 80% self-financed.
It's exactly the same as with
other research organizations.
In France, research
organizations
receive financing from
multiple sources--
the state and from
the private sector.
It's the same for everyone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Thierry Souccar is also
critical of Professor Lecerf.
Due to his connections
to the milk industry,
Professor Lecerf is a
member of an academic body
within an organization that
researches behavior and food
consumption.
This organization is a part
of the French milk industry's
governing body.
For Souccar, this is a
conflict of interest.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> What conflict of interest?
It's voluntary work.
It's a group of researchers,
sociologists, psychologists,
and nutrition experts that
meet to work on theses
and organize symposia.
We do it because
we're fascinated
by our field of work.
I really don't see where
there's a conflict of interest.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Everyone aside from
him sees the problem.
The entire press
considers it a problem.
Everyone who's involved
with the ethics of it
sees a conflict of interest
between the researchers
and the industry.
But when you ask the
scientists and researchers who
are connected to the farm
or the food industry,
they don't have a
problem with it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Back to Germany, and to
the question whether milk is
healthy or not.
We visit our last destination,
the University of Osnabrück
in North Rhine Westphalia.
This is where the dermatologist,
Professor Bodo Melnik, teaches.
He has developed a
theory about milk
that has caused a
lot of discussion
in professional circles.
Professor Melnik recognizes a
biochemical signaling system
in milk that stimulates
growth in the body.
According to Melnik, this
has grave consequences
for one's health.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> But we now know that acne
starts earlier and earlier.
Even eight to
nine-year-olds have acne.
And we know now that
it lasts longer.
We know that 50% of American
women have acne into their 20s,
so they still have
spots until they're 30--
half of them.
Milk is a fascinating topic,
because in 2008, dermatologists
received the message from a
Harvard epidemiology group
that milk consumption
was a cause of acne.
So I asked myself,
how is that possible?
How can milk affect
the sebaceous gland?
It has to come from the inside.
That means milk must have
some kind of signaling effect.
So we have different
attributes for milk,
and have said that it is
not a normal foodstuff.
We have to understand
that milk has
the goal of stimulating growth.
We have to understand that milk
has an overriding importance.
It's a biological doping system.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> According to Melnik, milk
activates two growth signals
in the body.
Amino acids in the milk
stimulate the liver
to produce the growth
hormone, IGF-1.
And microRNA, the small
genetic building blocks,
regulate our genes to
also stimulate growth.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> In puberty, the whole thing
is kick started and we get
acne, and probably encourage
the undesirable development
of other glands.
And this goes on until diabetes.
If we continue to
overstimulate the glands,
we get diabetes, obesity--
insulin makes the
fat cells grow,
and finally, we get dementia.
And a high correlation
between milk consumption
and Parkinson's already
exists, which is also
a disease that's on the rise.
It's a system that
naturally pushes us
into these growth phases.
And these diseases of modern
civilization are, in my view,
diseases of excessive growth.
>> Professor Melnik claims
this growth can even increase
the risk of cancer.
There is a special
microRNA present in milk
that is also created by cancer
cells to speed up growth.
They are called
microRNA-21, or oncomir-21.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> In our pasteurized milk,
we take up oncomir-21.
miR-21 the microRNA-21
of the cow,
is genetically exactly the same
as the microRNA of the human.
I consider this to be
extremely dangerous.
I think that pasteurized
milk should be taken out
of our food supply chain.
I would urge all my
patients if they drink milk
to drink UHT milk.
Luckily, the high heat
deactivates the process.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Melnik is the only
supporter of this theory.
The majority of nutrition
scientists reject it.
One of them is Professor Watzl
from the Max Rubner-Institut.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I've talked with Mr.
Melnik several times.
We've had intense
discussions and held talks
in large professional circles.
He has an interesting
hypothesis,
but he cannot deliver
any practical proof.
The data from intervention
studies and research studies
refute him.
>> This means the majority
of studies do not find
a correlation between diseases
of modern civilization and milk
consumption.
Only with cancer, the
situation is unclear.
The risk of prostate cancer
can be slightly increased
by the consumption of milk.
But the risk of colon cancer
is reduced by milk consumption.
With other cancer
types, researchers
have found no connection.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> So far there's no
general verdict on cancer.
You have to make
strong distinctions.
Prostate cancer is
the only example
where it's been clinically shown
that high milk consumption may
have a negative effect.
>> We have reached the
end of our journey.
Is milk healthy or unhealthy?
The verdicts
contradict each other.
The studies are inconclusive.
Whom should the
consumer believe?
The scientists that
rely on studies,
or the doctors that rely on
their practical experience?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When you're asking whom
to believe, believe me,
simply because I
think I'm right.
And my personal experience
has shown me that I am right.
I may be swimming
against the current,
but I am a school
doctor, and not a doctor
of alternative medicine.
I do not pursue an
esoteric agenda,
but simply referred to
studies that I have done
and to my own
personal experience.
>> Personal experience
versus scientific study.
The majority of
nutrition experts
paint the critics as
ideologically-orientated
propagandists.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> You have to separate
nutrition from ideology.
You cannot moralize nutrition.
That milk is unsuitable for
someone is completely normal.
That milk is not perfect
is completely normal.
That the studies are complex
and contradictory is normal.
We were investigating.
We're observing.
I'm not waging a war.
It's the anti-milk faction
that's on the warpath.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The milk industry and its
advertising have been trying
to keep the image
of milk untainted.
Successfully,
despite its critics,
milk has retained a positive
image with consumers.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I have a deep respect for
the marketing achievements
of the dairy industry.
They really are experts that
have managed to influence
the opinions of the people.
This is 30 years
of brainwashing,
so that even today,
every last person
believes that milk is healthy.
>> The discussion amongst
the experts continues--
milk or no milk?
The opinions remain divided.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Technically speaking, milk
is rich in important nutrients.
It's a good source
of protein, minerals,
and most of all, calcium.
Scientifically
speaking, these are
arguments for moderate
but regular consumption.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> We have a vast amount
of products in this field,
and I think it's an excess.
It's an overstimulation
over decades.
And the effect is not
sudden, but creeping,
which is why it goes unnoticed.
>> Our journey has shown, milk
can trigger more problems than
most of us realize.
Yet, some people benefit
from consuming milk.
Whether milk can cause
illness on a large scale
remains disputed.
Which experts to
believe is ultimately
up to each one of us.